docs/index.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Home
---

This workflow can be used to generate a multisample VCF file from BAM 
files using GATK HaplotypeCaller.

This workflow is part of [BioWDL](https://biowdl.github.io/)
developed by the SASC team at [Leiden University Medical Center](
https://www.lumc.nl/).

## Usage
This workflow can be run using
[Cromwell](http://cromwell.readthedocs.io/en/stable/):
```
java -jar cromwell-<version>.jar run -i inputs.json gatk-variantcalling.wdl
```

### Inputs
Inputs are provided through a JSON file. The minimally required inputs are
described below and a template containing all possible inputs can be generated
using Womtool as described in the
[WOMtool documentation](http://cromwell.readthedocs.io/en/stable/WOMtool/).

```json
{
  "GatkVariantCalling.referenceFasta": "A reference fasta file",
  "GatkVariantCalling.referenceFastaFai": "The index for the reference fasta",
  "GatkVariantCalling.referenceFastaDict": "The dict file for the reference fasta",
  "GatkVariantCalling.dbsnpVCF": "A dbSNP VCF file",
  "GatkVariantCalling.dbsnpVCFIndex": "The index (.tbi) for the dbSNP VCF file",
  "GatkVariantCalling.bamFiles": "A list of input BAM files and their associated indexes"
}
```

Some additional inputs which may be of interest are:
```json
{
  "GatkVariantCalling.scatterList.regions": "The path to a bed file containing the regions for which variant calling will be performed",
  "GatkVariantCalling.scatterSize": "The size of scatter regions (see explanation of scattering below), defaults to 10,000,000",
  "GatkVariantCalling.vcfBasename": "The basename of the to be outputed VCF files, defaults to 'multisample'"
}

```
An output directory can be set using an `options.json` file. See [the
cromwell documentation](
https://cromwell.readthedocs.io/en/stable/wf_options/Overview/) for more
information.

Example `options.json` file:
```JSON
{
"final_workflow_outputs_dir": "my-analysis-output",
"use_relative_output_paths": true,
"default_runtime_attributes": {
  "docker_user": "$EUID"
  }
}
```
Alternatively an output directory can be set with `GatkVariantCalling.outputDir`.
`GatkVariantCalling.outputDir` must be mounted in the docker container. Cromwell will
need a custom configuration to allow this.

#### Example
```json
{
  "GatkVariantCalling.dbsnpVCF": "/home/user/genomes/human/dbsnp/dbsnp-151.vcf.gz",
  "GatkVariantCalling.dbsnpVCFIndex": "/home/user/genomes/human/dbsnp/dbsnp-151.vcf.gz.tbi",
  "GatkVariantCalling.referenceFasta": "/home/user/genomes/human/GRCh38.fasta",
  "GatkVariantCalling.referenceFastaFai": "/home/user/genomes/human/GRCh38.fasta.fai",
  "GatkVariantCalling.referenceFastaDict": "/home/user/genomes/human/GRCh38.dict",
  "GatkVariantCalling.vcfBasename": "s1",
  "GatkVariantCalling.outputDir": "/home/user/analysis/results/",
  "GatkVariantCalling.bamFiles": [
    {
      "file": "/home/user/mapping/results/s1_1.bam",
      "index": "/home/user/mapping/results/s1_1.bai"
    },
    {
      "file": "/home/user/mapping/results/s1_2.bam",
      "index": "/home/user/mapping/results/s1_2.bai"
    }
  ]
}
```

### Dependency requirements and tool versions
Biowdl pipelines use docker images to ensure  reproducibility. This
means that biowdl pipelines will run on any system that has docker
installed. Alternatively they can be run with singularity.

For more advanced configuration of docker or singularity please check
the [cromwell documentation on containers](
https://cromwell.readthedocs.io/en/stable/tutorials/Containers/).

Images from [biocontainers](https://biocontainers.pro) are preferred for
biowdl pipelines. The list of default images for this pipeline can be
found in the default for the `dockerImages` input.

### output
A multisample vcf file and a multisample gvcf file.

## Scattering
This pipeline performs scattering to speed up analysis on grid computing
clusters. This is done by splitting the reference genome into regions of
roughly equal size (see the `scatterSize` input). Each of these regions will be
analyzed in separate jobs, allowing them to be processed in parallel.

For each BAM file input in the pipeline these scatters will be used. For 
example, with 5 BAM files and 4 scatters, 20 jobs will run to genotype the BAM
files.
The resulting GVCF files will be merged. Then GatkGenotypeGVCF will be 
scattered over the 4 scatters to create a VCF per scatters.
The output is merged into a multisample vcf.

## Contact
<p>
  <!-- Obscure e-mail address for spammers -->
For any question related to this workflow, please use the
<a href='https://github.com/biowdl/gatk-variant-calling/issues'>github issue tracker</a>
or contact the SASC team directly at: 
<a href='&#109;&#97;&#105;&#108;&#116;&#111;&#58;&#115;&#97;&#115;&#99;&#64;&#108;&#117;&#109;&#99;&#46;&#110;&#108;'>
&#115;&#97;&#115;&#99;&#64;&#108;&#117;&#109;&#99;&#46;&#110;&#108;</a>.
</p>

Commit message:

add link to inputs overview to docs

docs/index.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Home
---

This workflow can be used to generate a multisample VCF file from BAM 
files using GATK HaplotypeCaller.

This workflow is part of [BioWDL](https://biowdl.github.io/)
developed by the SASC team at [Leiden University Medical Center](
https://www.lumc.nl/).

## Usage
This workflow can be run using
[Cromwell](http://cromwell.readthedocs.io/en/stable/):
```
java -jar cromwell-<version>.jar run -i inputs.json gatk-variantcalling.wdl
```

### Inputs
Inputs are provided through a JSON file. The minimally required inputs are
described below and a template containing all possible inputs can be generated
using Womtool as described in the
[WOMtool documentation](http://cromwell.readthedocs.io/en/stable/WOMtool/).
For an overview of all available inputs, see [this page](./inputs.html).
```json
{
  "GatkVariantCalling.referenceFasta": "A reference fasta file",
  "GatkVariantCalling.referenceFastaFai": "The index for the reference fasta",
  "GatkVariantCalling.referenceFastaDict": "The dict file for the reference fasta",
  "GatkVariantCalling.dbsnpVCF": "A dbSNP VCF file",
  "GatkVariantCalling.dbsnpVCFIndex": "The index (.tbi) for the dbSNP VCF file",
  "GatkVariantCalling.bamFiles": "A list of input BAM files and their associated indexes"
}
```

Some additional inputs which may be of interest are:
```json
{
  "GatkVariantCalling.scatterList.regions": "The path to a bed file containing the regions for which variant calling will be performed",
  "GatkVariantCalling.scatterSize": "The size of scatter regions (see explanation of scattering below), defaults to 10,000,000",
  "GatkVariantCalling.vcfBasename": "The basename of the to be outputed VCF files, defaults to 'multisample'"
}

```
An output directory can be set using an `options.json` file. See [the
cromwell documentation](
https://cromwell.readthedocs.io/en/stable/wf_options/Overview/) for more
information.

Example `options.json` file:
```JSON
{
"final_workflow_outputs_dir": "my-analysis-output",
"use_relative_output_paths": true,
"default_runtime_attributes": {
  "docker_user": "$EUID"
  }
}
```
Alternatively an output directory can be set with `GatkVariantCalling.outputDir`.
`GatkVariantCalling.outputDir` must be mounted in the docker container. Cromwell will
need a custom configuration to allow this.

#### Example
```json
{
  "GatkVariantCalling.dbsnpVCF": "/home/user/genomes/human/dbsnp/dbsnp-151.vcf.gz",
  "GatkVariantCalling.dbsnpVCFIndex": "/home/user/genomes/human/dbsnp/dbsnp-151.vcf.gz.tbi",
  "GatkVariantCalling.referenceFasta": "/home/user/genomes/human/GRCh38.fasta",
  "GatkVariantCalling.referenceFastaFai": "/home/user/genomes/human/GRCh38.fasta.fai",
  "GatkVariantCalling.referenceFastaDict": "/home/user/genomes/human/GRCh38.dict",
  "GatkVariantCalling.vcfBasename": "s1",
  "GatkVariantCalling.outputDir": "/home/user/analysis/results/",
  "GatkVariantCalling.bamFiles": [
    {
      "file": "/home/user/mapping/results/s1_1.bam",
      "index": "/home/user/mapping/results/s1_1.bai"
    },
    {
      "file": "/home/user/mapping/results/s1_2.bam",
      "index": "/home/user/mapping/results/s1_2.bai"
    }
  ]
}
```

### Dependency requirements and tool versions
Biowdl pipelines use docker images to ensure  reproducibility. This
means that biowdl pipelines will run on any system that has docker
installed. Alternatively they can be run with singularity.

For more advanced configuration of docker or singularity please check
the [cromwell documentation on containers](
https://cromwell.readthedocs.io/en/stable/tutorials/Containers/).

Images from [biocontainers](https://biocontainers.pro) are preferred for
biowdl pipelines. The list of default images for this pipeline can be
found in the default for the `dockerImages` input.

### output
A multisample vcf file and a multisample gvcf file.

## Scattering
This pipeline performs scattering to speed up analysis on grid computing
clusters. This is done by splitting the reference genome into regions of
roughly equal size (see the `scatterSize` input). Each of these regions will be
analyzed in separate jobs, allowing them to be processed in parallel.

For each BAM file input in the pipeline these scatters will be used. For 
example, with 5 BAM files and 4 scatters, 20 jobs will run to genotype the BAM
files.
The resulting GVCF files will be merged. Then GatkGenotypeGVCF will be 
scattered over the 4 scatters to create a VCF per scatters.
The output is merged into a multisample vcf.

## Contact
<p>
  <!-- Obscure e-mail address for spammers -->
For any question related to this workflow, please use the
<a href='https://github.com/biowdl/gatk-variant-calling/issues'>github issue tracker</a>
or contact the SASC team directly at: 
<a href='&#109;&#97;&#105;&#108;&#116;&#111;&#58;&#115;&#97;&#115;&#99;&#64;&#108;&#117;&#109;&#99;&#46;&#110;&#108;'>
&#115;&#97;&#115;&#99;&#64;&#108;&#117;&#109;&#99;&#46;&#110;&#108;</a>.
</p>
